- Good afternoon.
I'm Daniel Benjamin and I'm
delighted to welcome you
to this event of the
John Sloan Dickey Center
for International Understanding.
Our guest today is one of
the most compelling figures
of the last decades of the 20th century
and the first decades of the 21st.
She is rightly known as
one of our most outstanding
Secretaries of State,
as well I should add,
as being the first woman
to hold that office.
Whether in or out of office,
she has also been one of
the nation's most tireless,
dedicated, and effective public citizens,
a tough and relentless
advocate for American values
and American interests.
She has been a beacon for
democracy and human rights
around the world and a
clear voice of conscience
in some of the most difficult
international situations
we have faced.
Madeleine Korbel Albright is
a native of Czechoslovakia
and yet her story is profoundly American.
As a child, she was twice a refugee,
first from Hitler, in
his concentration camps,
three of her grandparents perished,
and then from Stalin when
the Iron Curtain fell.
The daughter of a distinguished
Czechoslovakian diplomat
and an international affairs scholar,
her early years saw her move
from a fine embassy residence
to a small rented house in Denver.
Dr. Albright received a Bachelors
with honors from Wellesley
and, as lots of college
students from excellent schools
find out every year,
she learned how to start
from the bottom.
Her first jobs were as a cub reporter
for the Rolla Missouri Daily
News writing obituaries,
articles for the society pages,
and as she notes in her autobiography,
interviewing people who had spotted UFOs.
Later, she worked picking pictures
for Encyclopedia Britannica.
Eventually, she returned
to graduate school,
earning a masters and a doctorate degree
from Columbia from the
Department of Law and Government,
and she settled into
raising three daughters
and a vigorous life of volunteer work.
At the age of 39, 15
years after her last job
at the Britannica, she was hired
as Chief Legislative Assistant
to US Senator, Edmund Muskie
and the beginning of
her extraordinary career
in public affairs began.
Within just a short time,
she was the head of Legislative Affairs
for President Jimmy Carter's
National Security Council.
Later, she was Foreign Policy Advisor
to 1984 Vice Presidential
Democratic Candidate,
Geraldine Ferraro, and the
1988 Presidential Candidate,
Michael Dukakis.
She was President of the
Center for National Policy
and after the 1992
election of Bill Clinton,
was confirmed as permanent representative
to the United Nations.
In 1997, she was
confirmed by the US Senate
as the 64th Secretary of State,
ascending to a post held
by Thomas Jefferson,
John Quincy Adams, a
certain Dartmouth graduate
named Daniel Webster, George
Marshall, and Dean Acheson.
There are no easy times
to be Secretary of State,
but Secretary Albright's
tenure was notably challenging.
She faced conflicts in
the Balkans in Iraq,
terrorist bombings in Africa,
a balky Middle East peace process,
and the work of shaping
post Cold War Europe.
Challenges remain in many of those areas,
but it is a testament to
Secretary Albright's achievements
that those years now
look relatively halcyon
compared to some of the
problems we face today.
In the inbox she left her successor
was but a fraction of what
was left eight years later
to Secretary Hilary Clinton.
It's worth noting as well
that Secretary Albright
was one of the very few secretaries,
perhaps the only one, who
was offered a promotion
when she left office, but
she declined her friend,
Vaclav Havel's kind offer to help make her
President of the Czech Republic
and resume private life in Washington.
Since leaving office,
Secretary Albright seems,
if anything, and if it
is physically possible,
to have accelerated.
She is now chair of the
Albright Stonebridge Group,
one of the world's foremost international
strategic consulting firms,
and professor in the practice of diplomacy
at the Georgetown University
School of Foreign Service.
She chairs both the National
Democratic Institute
for International Affairs
and the Pew Global Attitudes Project,
and serves as president
of the Truman Scholarship Foundation.
In nine years, she has written five
New York Times' bestsellers,
enough to bring envy to
the most prolific of us.
These include Madame
Secretary, a memoir from 2003,
Memo to the President,
How We Can Restore America's Reputation
and Leadership from 2008,
and most recently, Prague Winter,
A Personal Story of Remembrance and War,
1937-1948, which published in 2012.
In that same year, 2012,
Secretary Albright received
the Presidential Medal of Freedom,
the nation's highest civilian honor,
from President Obama.
When she is not on a plane or at a podium,
she is doing something in some
ways even more remarkable,
supporting and developing the
community of foreign policy
practitioners in Washington
and around the country.
Everyone knows well Harry Truman's quip
that if you want a friend
in Washington, buy a dog,
but as someone who has
benefited immeasurably
from her wisdom and her friendship,
I can say that President Truman
never knew Secretary Albright,
who's been an advisor
and a friend for me and many others
who have served in or around
government in recent years.
Her presence here is a testament
to that kind of friendship.
Believe me, this sort of
generosity with time and support
is not the norm out there,
and there is a generation
of us who are profoundly
grateful to Madeleine Albright
for her leadership and
especially for her friendship.
It is now a great
pleasure for me to welcome
Secretary Madeleine Albright.
(applause)
- Thank you, thank you very much.
Thank you.
Well Mr. Benjamin,
I would like to thank you for
telling everybody who I am
because not everybody always knows.
Not long ago, I was
coming back from China.
Chicago was the first port of entry.
I was there getting undressed
for the security people.
I put my stuff down on the conveyor belt
and the lady behind me said,
"So where'd you get all
those screw top bottles?
"My bottles all leak."
I said, "I got 'em at
the Container Store."
Then I was going through the magnetometer
and the TSA guard looked
at me and he said,
"Oh my God, it's you."
He said, "I'm from Bosnia.
"We all love you in Bosnia
and if weren't for you,
"there wouldn't be a Bosnia.
"You're welcome to come to Bosnia."
Then he said, "Can I have
my picture taken with you?"
So we stopped the whole
line, it's a complete mess.
I go back to get my stuff
and the lady of the
screw top bottles said,
"So what exactly happened here?"
I said, "Well, I used to
be Secretary of State."
She said, "Of Bosnia?"
(laughter)
So thank you for straightening that out.
- I'm glad I could.
I'm also glad you were a
Secretary of State here.
So you are notably adorned in green.
- Totally.
(applause)
- In the sense of connections
and not of neckwear,
you have lots of Dartmouth ties.
Perhaps you'd like to review those.
- I would.
I'm delighted and I have to
say I'm a Dartmouth mother.
My daughter is the class of 1983.
She was the goalie of the ice hockey team,
she has many varsity
letters from Dartmouth,
and she was a very proud alum.
She also was part of the
Tucker Program Foundation,
which is what directed her to the law.
She is now a judge.
I was also asked to give the
commencement speech here.
I have come up a number of times,
notably sometimes during
the New Hampshire primaries.
I have been back and forth.
It's a fabulous school and I'm delighted
that you asked me to come.
- Well, we're delighted
to have you here too.
Judging by that reception,
I'd say you're something
of a rock star in the upper valley.
If only we could continue talking
about such pleasant things
as the college, but we meet
at a rather vexing moment,
I'd say, in international affairs.
We probably should plunge right in
because you've been
talking about this a lot
in the public.
I think you've used the word
"game changer" to describe
what has happened in the Crimea,
and Russia's intervention there,
and the continued perilous
state of affairs in Ukraine.
I was wondering if you
wanted to give us your view
of that situation, its lasting impact,
and what we ought to be doing about it.
- I think it is a truly serious situation
and a game changer in the following way.
If I could just take a
few moments to answer it,
I think that I had spent my whole life
being what was known as a Soviet expert.
I was somebody that spent
time doing content analysis
by looking at Pravda and Vesti
to see if five words
were in a different order
or whether the portraits in
the Kremlin were different.
One of the great amazing
parts was to be president
at the time that the
Soviet Union fell apart.
It was something that
the first President Bush
had to deal with.
He is the one who actually said that
we wanted to have a Europe
that was whole and free.
Then President Clinton came into office
and the question was how to operate.
We were asked to do something
that had never been done
in the history of the world,
which is how to devolve the
power of your major adversary
in a respectful way.
You can defeat your adversary
on the field of battle,
but I happen to believe that
we didn't win the Cold War,
they lost the Cold War.
That's not just a semantic difference
because the place fell apart.
The question was how to treat
them well and respectfully.
That's why we created the G8,
why in fact, we helped
in a financial crisis.
We tried to figure out how to bring them
into the international system.
One of the things that we did decide to do
was the countries that
had been part of central
and eastern Europe had been
stopped from being part
of a Europe that was whole and free.
So, in fact, we decided to expand NATO
and I went to see
President Putin about it.
He said, "You don't need NATO
because this is a new Russia,"
and I said, "Mr. President,
"it is a new Russia,
and this is a new NATO,
"and you can be a member of it."
It was not something that
was done against them,
it was something that many
of us felt was justified
because of the way that
World War II had ended.
We spent a lot of time
trying to bring Russia
into the system.
That was the whole thing,
to make them part of it.
What has happened is that the game change,
all of a sudden, is
that Putin has decided,
he has his own version
of history, by the way.
He makes up facts.
That's what they do in the KGB.
The bottom line is that he is
living in his own set of facts
and he sees a Europe
that is whole and free
as being anti-Russian, which it is not.
He specifically has focused on Ukraine.
Ukraine is a very complex country,
it is a neighboring state,
and Crimea is a complicated history.
There probably were ways to change.
We've changed borders in countries
as a result of negotiation.
Invasion is not the way to do it.
I think the thing that
makes it a game changer
is that this is not the kind of behavior
that we thought might be able
to work in the 21st century
and trying to figure out
whether there's any way
to work with Putin's Russia
because a lot of the people
in Russia also wanna be a part of Europe.
Putin has identified himself with an anger
by some nationalist in Russia
in terms of what's happened
to Russia's identity.
The last thing, in 1991,
I was teaching at
Georgetown in the center.
We went to do a lot of
survey work all over Europe,
including in Russia,
and we had focus groups.
There was this one focus
group that I'll never forget
where this man stands up and he said,
"I'm so embarrassed.
"We used to be a superpower
"and now we're just
Bangladesh with missiles."
The bottom line is the Russians,
it's a head case, psychologically,
had lost their identity.
I think Putin has bought into that
and he is trying to present a larger
nationalist Russia that can
have pride in its history,
and I think they need to
have pride in their history,
but it doesn't mean that they
have to dismember Ukraine.
- I think of you as a person
who's brought a lot of wisdom
from the 20th century
into state craft today.
Certainly, that played a
big part in your thinking
about the Balkans in the 1990s.
When you look at someone
who is using a myth
of a stab in the back,
as Putin has been using
about the west and the
period after the collapse
of the Soviet Union, has been
playing on ultra-nationalism,
has been upholding himself as the keeper
of a certain kind of civilization,
a Russian civilization,
it makes me very nervous.
I'm wondering to what extent you feel like
we're seeing a replay of
something very pernicious
that we've seen before.
- I'm very nervous, always,
about historical analogies.
What I always tell my
students, it's really important
to know history but nothing
is exactly quite the same.
What I do think is an
issue that we have watched,
it was certainly true in the 20th century
having begun in earlier centuries,
is the role of nationalism.
Nationalism is a very two-edged sword
in that people need to
have pride in their nation,
patriotism, but when that
becomes something virulent,
which in turn is hatred of
the people who live next door,
and is used for the purpose
of domestic politics
to divert attention from some
economic problems or whatever,
then it's very dangerous.
What I find troubling
is that's what destroyed
large portions of Europe
during the first part
of the 20th century and, to some extent,
because there have been a
variety of economic problems
in Europe, there are
questions about how well
the European Union functions,
and in fact, there's some
return of nationalism generally.
You can see what just happened
in the elections in Hungary,
where really passing strange...
Viktor Orban, I met in the 80s
and he was this young
student and very idealistic.
All of a sudden, he's turned
into a hyper-nationalist
who thinks that Hungary should be larger.
It is a dangerous aspect.
You introduced me with my very long story
and I am very sensitive to this
as somebody who was
born in Czechoslovakia.
Czechoslovakia was/is
a multi-ethnic country
and one of the issues really was,
what happened to a very
large German minority?
Once Czechoslovakia had
been formed in 1918,
many Germans lived in
the northwestern part
of Czechoslovakia, known as Sudetenland,
'cause it's south of Germany.
There were some people who lived there
who felt that they had not
gotten the jobs they wanted
but for the most part,
as I look at history,
it was fairly well, carefully done.
They did have jobs, and there was a way
to make everybody live together.
There was a person there
who provoked problems.
His name was Konrad
Henlein, he was a Nazi,
and so the issue came,
what was gonna happen
to this part of the country?
One of the parts,
this is why I try to
be careful about this,
is that people were concerned
about what was going to happen,
and the issue was Munich.
What happened was that the
Germans and the Italians
made a deal with the British and French
over the heads of the Czechoslovaks.
They never were at the table.
The country was sold down the river.
I think one has to be
careful not to exclude,
in this case the Ukranians
have to be at the table.
You cannot have somebody
who uses provocation
in order to separate one part
of a country from another.
We don't have to go into
all the motivations of it,
but these kinds of things have happened
and they are very dangerous.
You never know when they're gonna stop.
- As we think forward about what we can do
to redress the problem or ameliorate it,
there is no military
option, as we all know.
Whether it's Bangladesh or not,
it has a lot of nuclear weapons
and no one wants to see blood shed
on the European continent.
Unilateral sanctions by the United States
aren't gonna make any difference.
In fact, they will probably
make us look weak, if anything.
I guess the question I have
for you is do you see the west
coming together around this issue
and taking the kind of
action that is necessary?
I think this is really
a moment when Europe
needs to be heard from.
- I thought, last week, that in fact,
Putin, who had tried to divide Europe,
had actually united it.
What I thought was very interesting,
President Obama had been
scheduled to go to Europe.
These were previously scheduled meetings
that were taking place in
Brussels and The Hague.
In fact, he brought a
lot of leaders together.
I think that there was
a very strong statement
in terms of support.
The hope is that it will last.
In terms of reading
the paper this morning,
there are already some questions
about where the Germans are on this.
This is the problem, if I
could state it this way.
First of all, at Georgetown
I teach a course.
I say foreign policy's just
trying to get some country
to do what you want is all it is.
The bottom line is, what are the tools?
So there are not a lot of tools
in that national security toolbox.
There is diplomacy,
bilateral, multilateral,
on one end and the use
of force on the other,
the threat of the use of force.
As you know, when we
were in the government,
people would say,
"Don't threaten the use of force
"unless you're prepared to use it."
- [Daniel] Right.
- Law enforcement, intelligence,
and in the middle are the economic tools.
The carrots, which are trade and aid,
and sanctions, which are the sticks.
We always like to choose the middle option
and so in many ways, sanctions
are the tool of choice.
Diplomacy, you do all the
time and the use of force
brings its own problems.
The question is always between unilateral
and multilateral sanctions.
The problem with sanctions is
they take quite a long time
to take effect.
It is a matter of cutting
off a variety of people
from their capabilities of
carrying on economic life
and what is interesting
is often the countries,
the targeting countries,
also absorb the problems of sanctions
as well as the targeted countries.
There's some pain to it.
There is the evident problem in Europe,
which is even more
dependent in terms of trade
and issues with the Russians
as to whether they're gonna
suck it up and deal with it.
That is the question.
We are operating with
democracies that obviously
have to have the support of their people
and the sanctions take
a while to take hold.
I do think that the point has to be made
over and over again that
this is a game changer,
that many things could
change in Europe if,
in fact, there is not a
unified approach to it.
What is making people nervous right now,
Crimea, we can talk about
because it is a very
historically peculiar place in that way,
but the bottom line is
there are Russian speaking
populations in the Baltics, in
Latvia more than the others.
There's the issue of Moldova,
where there already is
this kind of peculiar place
called Transnistria.
The question is, to go back to your issue,
is do you protect some
kind of an ethnic group?
These are multi-ethnic societies
and there's always some group
that is ready to be
paid to be provocative.
That's the danger, is
that this will spread
and if we don't stand up in
some way, in a unified way,
then the issue of Europe
Poland-free is a real question.
I believe that the United
States is much stronger
when it has a unified
Europe working together
so we can deal with the problems
in some other parts of the world.
- One of the first things
that you learn in diplomacy,
of course, is that
everything is connected,
much to one's frustration.
When we look at some
of the other key issues
that we're dealing with around the world,
they depend on Russian cooperation.
How do we go forward now, in
terms of dealing with Iran
and its nuclear program?
We weren't getting a lot of
cooperation of the Russians
on Syria, but there too, the
structure of the international
community is such that it's
very hard to make any progress
without Russia.
How do we get ourselves
out of this Gordian knot?
- I think one has to make the assumptions
that the Russian foreign
policy is not altruistic
as far as either Iran
or Syria's concerned,
that they have national interest
that they wanna deal with.
So I think that you're absolutely right,
everything is connected,
but we just shouldn't say that it is.
Basically, there's P5+1
meetings going on in Vienna now
on Iran, and the question
is how the Russians
are gonna behave in there.
Theoretically, they also don't wanna see
a nuclear armed Iran.
On Syria, again, this was
not done out of altruism,
they are concerned, were concerned,
about the spread of chemical
weapons into various parts
of Russia, frankly, in terms
of extremist groups, et cetera.
They wanted to get some control
over the chemical weapons.
They haven't exactly shown
that they are helpful
when we talk about humanitarian
assistance in Syria,
so I think that we just have to assume
that there are certain areas
where the Russians will see
their realistic approach that
they need to work with us.
A lot depends on the mood,
a lot depends on whether they
actually look at it that way.
Part of the deal was here that we thought
that we were gonna make Russia
a part of the international system
where they would actually be
helpful on certain issues.
We need them on some issues
to do with climate change
or ships in the Arctic
or some in tracking terrorists
in a variety of ways.
I think that the effort should be,
this is the hard part,
is how you begin to
isolate them on one part
and then try to figure out
how to really involve them
in some of the other issues.
It is difficult, there's no question.
We don't wanna completely never
speak to the Russians again.
So how we divide this is part
of the difficulty of this.
- I think one of the questions
that's being asked now
is whether we should look back and examine
what we did in the 90s when
we went to the Madrid Summit,
you were at the front of
the bus, I was in the back,
for NATO enlargement.
I guess the question is,
do you think that that bears reexamination
or did we do the right thing then
and we need to march forward?
- I think we did the right thing.
It was not done just off
the top of our heads.
I think the thing that
has to be remembered,
and this has been very
much a part of the life
that I've been involved in ...
The United States, by the way,
at the end of World War II,
offered the Soviet
Union the Marshall Plan.
What was interesting,
Czechoslovakia accepted.
What happened was that
the foreign minister
of Czechoslovakia, Jan Masaryk,
was summoned to Moscow and told flat out
that they couldn't
accept the Marshall Plan.
My father was actually Chief of Staff
to the foreign ministry at the time
and he reported on the fact that Masaryk
came back from Moscow and said,
"I now know that I'm
not the foreign minister
"of a sovereign country."
What happened after
World War II as a result
of agreements made during World War II,
the Red Army "liberated"
central and eastern Europe.
As a result of a variety
of salami tactics,
one after another, became
a communist country.
Czechoslovakia was the last one.
There was a coup in 1948,
a complicated story,
and as a result of that,
NATO was formed in '49.
All of a sudden, the United
States saw what was going on
in terms of the salami tactics
of creating the Soviet Bloc.
So NATO was formed and these
people that had wanted to be
part of the west at
the end of World War II
were excluded from it.
Instead, they were made to be
members to the Warsaw Pact.
The Warsaw Pact falls apart.
We didn't destroy the Warsaw Pact.
Nobody wanted to be members of it.
The question was, how do you ...
When I was talking about
this survey that I did,
we went all over and people in Poland,
and Hungary, and Czechoslovakia would say,
"We just wanna be Europeans."
The question was, being a part of NATO
was part of being Europeans.
I think it was the right thing to do.
I went around and we talked first
about the Partnership for
Peace and trying to figure out
how to bring these countries in.
NATO is not a charitable organization.
You have to, in fact,
fulfill certain commitments
and these countries
were prepared to do it.
I think it was the right thing to do.
One of the things I was asked to do,
it had just been the
60th anniversary of NATO,
the heads of state met in Strasbourg Kehl,
and a new Secretary General was named.
Then the heads of states also decided
that there needed to be a new
strategic concept for NATO
and that there should
be a group of experts
that would work on it.
Every country named an expert,
and the United States named me.
Secretary General Rasmussen decided
that the group of experts
would have 12 countries represented,
automatically irritating 16 countries,
and then he asked me to chair it.
We looked at what the
new strategic concept
for NATO was supposed to be.
This organization that had been
created during the Cold War,
most powerful military alliance
in the history of the world,
what was its mandate?
We began to look more and
more at out of area aspects
such as, some had been in Bosnia,
but then also in Afghanistan,
what were the different
things that NATO was gonna do?
It was not anti-Russian.
For his own historical purposes,
I think that Putin, he needs an enemy.
I think we should now allow that
to undermine the existence of NATO.
I think it was the right thing to do.
- Let's talk for a moment
about other challenges
that seem to never go away.
We're now in a pause to
reassess the Middle East
peace process talks.
This has been quite a
soap opera, if you will.
We've gone, it seems, over the brink,
although you never really
know in the Middle East
when you're over the
brink, or on the edge,
or coming back from the brink.
You had long experience
wrestling with some of the personalities
involved in these talks.
I'm curious what you
think about prospects now.
The word on the street in
international relations,
if you will, is that
the two-state solution
may be at an end.
I'm wondering what your
thoughts are on that.
- I am an optimist who worries a lot.
Let me just say this.
I think that this is a
constantly iterative story
and even though there are
an awful lot of people here,
if I were to invite you
to come to Camp David,
you might think it would be fun.
I can tell you, after
two weeks in the rain
with the Israelis and Palestinians,
I don't care if I ever go back.
It has been very much a back and forth,
some of it drama and some
of it just the difficulty
of working out the issues.
I think we know what the answers are.
When President Clinton left office,
he laid down the Clinton Parameters.
They're only a limited
number of solutions here
and the two-state solution
has been a part of it.
I hate to think it's the end
of the two-state solution.
I know that there are real questions
as to whether there should be one state.
I think if one believes that
Israel is a Jewish state,
which I do, then there's
the question about
what happens to the variety
of Palestinians and Arabs
that live in Israel?
Israel is a democracy and therefore,
having people vote and be a part of it
is the issue, frankly.
In terms of demography, what does that do?
I think the two-state
solution is the only solution.
The question is, since we
know what the answers are
and the United States has done ...
I think Secretary Kerry
has been remarkable
in his dedication and doggedness to this,
but ultimately, it's the leaders
in the countries themselves
that have to make the decisions.
The question is exactly, whether
they look at the precipice
and think, "I'll never fall
in, the other guy will,"
or whether they actually see
that their futures are linked
and that they have to
go back to the table.
This is a pretty dicey time.
I have been an optimist,
unnecessarily so or unrequitedly
so, for a long time,
but I do think that is the only solution.
- I'm reminded of something
Vaclav Hovel said to you once
after you gave a speech in Prague.
That's a speech no Czech
diplomat or statesman
could've ever given because
it was too optimistic.
- Right.
- But you gave it in Czech.
- No, but I mean everybody
has their history.
Why wouldn't I be an optimist?
I grew up in Czechoslovakia,
I came to the United States,
I got to be an American citizen,
and I ended up as Secretary
of State, not so bad.
- Not so bad, no.
(applause)
Actually, that reminds me of the story
that the President told
when you were given
the Medal of Freedom,
where an Ethiopian man,
you were at a naturalization ceremony
and an Ethiopian man
came up to you and said,
"Only in America can a refugee
meet the Secretary of State,"
and you responded ...
- Only in America can a refugee
become Secretary of State.
One of the things I love
to do, I have to say,
is go to naturalization ceremonies.
The most amazing one, frankly,
and you were talking
about Thomas Jefferson,
was the one during the
millennium in Monticello.
It was an incredible ceremony for people
that have been in Monticello.
It was beautiful.
It, obviously, was outside.
I am not an officer of the
law so I could not administer
the oath of office, but then I went around
and I gave everybody their
naturalization certificate.
I said to them, "I have
exactly the same certificate.
"It's the most important piece
of paper you will ever get.
"Keep it safely."
- You've been very busy, and
you've been very, very busy
for a long time.
- I am really old.
(laughter)
- That wasn't what I meant.
- I know.
I went to college at a
time somewhere between
the invention of the iPad
and the discovery of fire.
(laughter)
- I think you were a
little closer to the iPad.
I wanted to ask you about, first of all,
what the secret of your energy is,
and second of all, how you've managed
to keep all the balls in the air?
I was mentioning to
Secretary Albright before
that probably the last time
we had half this many people
in one auditorium here at Dartmouth
was when Anne-Marie
Slaughter was here last year,
not talking about Syria or foreign policy,
but about work/life balance.
In the interim, we've had
Sheryl Sandberg's book,
Lean In, and this has been a big debate.
You were dealing with
these questions long before
any of us knew you could get
a really big book contract
out of it.
I'm curious to know how you've
balanced all these things
and how you feel about this debate.
- Let me say that I did
go to a women's college.
I loved Wellesley, I graduated.
Most people thought about getting married.
I waited a really long time,
three days after graduation.
(laughter)
You told part of the
story, but part of it was
it didn't occur to me that I
couldn't do what I want to do.
I wanted to be a journalist.
I had this job that you describe
at the Rolla Daily News.
Then my husband was a reporter,
and we moved back to Chicago.
We were having dinner
with his managing editor.
He looks at me and he says,
"So what are you gonna do, honey?"
I said, "I'm gonna work on a newspaper."
He said, "I don't think so.
"You can't work on the
same paper as your husband
"because of labor guild regulations,"
and even though there were
three other papers in Chicago
at the time, he said,
"You wouldn't wanna
compete with your husband."
I know exactly what I would say now
or what some of the people
in the audience might say,
but at the time, I just
saluted and found another life.
I did do the Encyclopedia Britannica,
which for the younger people
in the audience, is a book.
(laughter)
Among the things I did was
not only select the pictures,
but there was a time
that newspaper columns
needed to be justified at the bottom
and so they needed some factoid.
I read the Encyclopedia Britannica,
so I knew things like
ostriches are voiceless.
So then we moved again
because that's what one does
when you're married, and
we moved to Long Island.
All of a sudden, I was very fat.
They didn't have sonograms
and they kept saying,
"You're so fat," and then it turned out
I was having twins.
I had to leave my twins in
incubators in the hospital.
I had always wanted to learn Russian.
Because I was Czech, I knew
that first year Russian
would be too easy, but I didn't
know second year Russian.
So as I left the children
in the incubators,
I started taking Russian.
I did that and that really
led me to graduate school.
Part of the thing was,
and this is hard to say,
is that every woman's
middle name is guilt.
You're never quite in the right place,
especially in that era 'cause
I was going to graduate school
and doing my period of good works.
The people that made me feel the worst
were other women who said,
"Don't you think you should
be in the carpool line,"
or whatever.
So this balance was something
that was hard to deal with.
I think every woman in
this room asks herself
whether she's a good mother or not.
I finally did go get this job.
My youngest daughter at
the time was eight or nine.
I said, "Katie, do you care?"
She said, "But Mom, at least
I'll know where you are."
I was working for Senator
Muskie and I had always agreed
that I would always take the
phone call from my children
no matter what.
One time, I was on the Senate
floor with Senator Muskie.
Katie called and they said,
"Your mother can't talk to you.
"She's on the floor with Senator Muskie."
So when I came home, Katie said,
"What are you doing on
the floor with Senator?"
(laughter)
The question was how to
make that balance work
and it never was particularly easy,
but I have talked to my three daughters,
who now are all married and have children,
and the issues are always the same.
They really are that you
do feel it's not easy.
There's no one formula.
I think that Anne-Marie has
talked about the necessity
of having the workplace a
little bit more adjusted.
Sheryl talks in a different way,
and it's a perfect example
that there is no one answer.
What I believe is, obviously,
men are an important part
in making this work, but so are the women.
The single most famous thing I ever said
was that there's a special place in hell
for women who don't help
each other, and part of it
has to do with not making
each other feel guilty.
(applause)
- Of course, since you
were Secretary of State,
it seems as though women have pretty much
had a lock on that position.
Secretary Kerry's trying
to claw that turf back,
but I'm curious what your
evaluation is of the progress
of women in both the foreign policy field
but in Washington, more broadly.
- It's improved, but it's
not completely there,
I don't think.
By the way, my youngest
granddaughter said,
four years ago when she
was seven, she said,
"So what's the big deal
about Grandma Maddie
"being Secretary of State?
"Only girls are Secretary of State."
That is very different
than when my name came up
and people were saying,
"Can a woman possibly
be Secretary of State?"
I think that there are
more women in Congress,
and I think I'm often
asked whether there's a way
there could be more women in Congress
as there are in parliaments
in the Scandinavian countries.
I think Americans don't
like the idea of quotas
or something like that, but I
do think that there need to be
more women in Congress.
I happen to believe, I vote on the issues.
I would prefer to have a
man who believes in choice
than Sarah Palin.
So it is not a matter of ...
(applause)
I do think that one of
the things that we know
is that, in fact,
more things happen if
you have support group
within a system.
So if there are more women
in the State Department
or the National Security Council,
or if in other countries,
there are more women
in ministerial posts and
more women are politically
and economically empowered,
then it does make a difference.
I think there should be more.
I happen to think that men
and women working together
on these issues is very important.
I know one of the issues,
one of the students
asked me this earlier,
do women think differently?
I do think, in some ways,
in terms of the more empathy
in a number of ways, putting yourself
into the other person's shoes.
I'm often asked would the world be better
if it were completely run by women?
I say no.
If you think that, you've
forgotten high school.
The bottom line is that you need
men and women working together.
- You mentioned empathy and I'm reminded,
having leafed through
your autobiography again,
that you achieved a rare kind of fame,
famous in the way that
you actually get mentioned
in New Yorker cartoons,
which doesn't happen
to very many of us.
One of my absolute
favorites is of the woman
trying on the dress in the
shop and the very happy
shop assistant beams
at that woman and says,
"Madeleine Albright just
kicked butt in that dress."
Well, so much for empathy.
(laughter)
- One of the reasons that I
actually leg press 450 pounds
is so that I can.
- We'll keep that in mind over dinner.
- One of the other things I
have to say really impressed me
about your autobiography
was how you humanized,
in many ways, the position
of Secretary of State.
Your predecessor was a great
man, Warren Christopher,
but warm and fuzzy was not his long suit.
I have to say that in reading your book,
you get such a strong
feeling of what it's like
to be a person in these situations.
It's, of course, an
autobiography, not just a memoir
of your time at the department.
I came across this one footnote of yours,
which I think kind of sums it all up.
You said that you found
a note, a reminder.
You were talking about how
presidents can compartmentalize
and you said you came across,
"A note of my reminders to
myself dated January 28th, 1998.
"Call Senator Helms, call King Hussein,
"call Foreign Minister Amr Moussa,
"make other congressional calls,
"prepare for China meeting,
buy non-fat yogurt."
- Right.
- You were juggling a lot of things.
- I'll tell you what was interesting.
When I was ambassador of the UN,
I had lived on Long Island.
I had always thought that I
would like to live in Manhattan
under the right circumstances.
The apartment is the
penthouse of the Waldorf.
Actually, it's a hotel.
One of the things that we
were trying to do at the time,
there is no residents.
Congress wanted to know why
we were paying so much rent
at the hotel, and we'd say,
"Well, it is a hotel."
You get all the soaps, and
they come make your bed,
and all that.
I had a chef and a driver.
Then I go back to my house in Washington,
where I'd lived since 1968.
I did have security.
They all moved into my garage,
but I needed to buy yogurt.
So I had to deal with
those particular issues,
and I did have a family.
My kids were grown up.
One of the parts that
was kind of fun actually,
my Dartmouth daughter took over my life.
She would pay bills and things.
We completely reversed positions.
She'd call me up and she'd say,
"I just have your credit card here.
"Do you actually need
those other pair of shoes?"
Then, as we all worry, one of the things
when I was in Croatia, and
I went into this market
in Vukovar and they stoned us.
They started throwing stones at me
and one of the problems of
actually understanding Serbian,
I could hear what they were saying,
and they were saying, "Kurva,
kurva," which means whore.
I said to the security people,
"We need to get out of here."
So CNN covered a story,
carried a story that said,
"Albright stoned in Vukovar."
(laughter)
My daughter calls me,
called the operations center
at the State Department and said,
"Have you heard from my
mother," and they said no.
I got home and she said,
"What are you doing going
to dangerous places?
"You can't go to places
"Without telling us what you're doing."
There was that reversal,
and I've gotta say
that my kids and my grandkids
are the ones that kept me
as a completely human
being through all of it.
- That's great.
We should probably come back
to a slightly more somber issue,
and that is, as you know,
today we are one day
after the 20th anniversary
of the beginning of
the genocide in Rwanda.
This is something that you
have spoken about a great deal,
and I believe everyone
who was in that first term
of the Clinton
administration feels burdened
and troubled by what
happened then and there.
I am curious to know if, at
this particular milestone,
you have any more thoughts
about it and as we face a
particularly impossible challenge in Syria
where the killing goes on,
what we might be considering
to improve our reaction to these kinds of
humanitarian crises?
- It is clearly something
that has been on all our minds
and it's certainly something
that President Clinton
has over and over again asked for,
how did this happen, why did it happen,
and trying to figure out what went wrong.
I talk about it fairly frequently.
One of the things, 'cause I do teach this
decision-making course and you know this
from your own experience, which is that
hindsight is terrific.
There's a lot of information
that comes out afterwards,
but at the time, you
have to make decisions
on the basis of the
information that you have.
People may not believe this.
I just tell you it's a statement of fact
'cause I went back over
intelligence and things.
We didn't know everything that we now know
about what happened in Rwanda.
In fact, the information is
what I call volcanic genocide
because the airplane of the
Hutu president was shot down
and all of a sudden, this
happened very quickly.
I spent a lot of time arguing
about my instructions.
I won't go through all that,
but what we're watching now
is rolling genocide in a
number of different places.
I have spent a lot of time
looking at all of this.
We all have our stories and
I am a child of World War II.
One could make the argument
that people didn't know
what was happening during World War II.
In the Balkans, we
began to get information
on what was happening and
there are a lot of reasons
that I thought we needed to
do something in the Balkans,
but it was because we saw on CNN
that people were being raped and murdered
for being whatever ethnic group they were.
I have tried to keep with this
issue for a very long time
and did a task force under
the auspices of US Institute
for Peace and the Holocaust
Museum on genocide prevention,
trying to figure out how
you get the information
ahead of time, and very
rarely does a task force
produce any results, but what
happened was we suggested
that there be an
Atrocities Prevention Board
within the NSC system.
Because Samantha Power was
there as an individual,
it does exist.
President Obama made it happen.
Then there was the next piece to it.
I was asked to coach our task
force on what is now known
as the Responsibility to Protect,
which makes life very different.
If you know that something is happening,
does the international community
have some responsibility
to do something about it?
It's a General Assembly resolution
that has been out there.
The Libya Mandate was done
with the Responsibility to Protect in it.
The question is then, who carries it out
and what happens if ...
There's a real question
as to whether Libya hurt
or helped the Responsibility to Protect.
There's the judgment that it
hurt because to some extent,
it went beyond protecting civilians
to regime change.
The question is now Syria.
There is no question that
people are being barrel bombed
and starvation is being
used as a weapon of war.
I happen to think that
there is this Responsibility
to Protect, but the question
is, who carries it out
and what are the issues if, in fact,
there is no no-fly zone
or how do you provide
the humanitarian assistance?
I think we're slowly learning.
I was asked this question
yesterday in Washington.
I know what I feel like
that we didn't do Rwanda.
I know what it's like.
I get asked it, President
Clinton gets asked it.
We are going to be asked,
why didn't we do something
about Syria, not 20 years
from now, but a year from now,
and I do think that that
Responsibility to Protect exists.
One of the things to go back
to the historical analogy,
I finally, as a result
of writing Prague Winter,
understood some of the
decision-making process
around Munich.
Something that I never quite
understood was how tired
the British and French
were from World War I.
They had lost a whole
generation of young men,
their budget was a
mess, and their military
was decapitated in many ways.
While I will always believe
that Neville Chamberlain
is one of the more odious
characters in history,
I do understand, all of a sudden,
why he wanted peace so much.
What he said about the
country that I was born in,
"Why should we care about
people in far away places
"with unpronounceable names?"
The question is, we are tired
from Afghanistan and Iraq,
our budget is a mess, there are questions
about our military, so
we have to ask ourselves,
do we care about people in faraway places
with unpronounceable
names and will we be sorry
if we don't actually
do something about it?
- You mentioned Congress before.
For a moment, I was thinking
of the first question
that I would ask you today,
was is it really like
in House of Cards?
Is it really that bad?
This is a broader question
about polarization.
You manage to have a
good working relationship
with a man whose nickname
was Senator No, Jesse Helms,
who was really one of
the legendary figures
in the history of the Senate and a man
who was very, very challenging
to work with by all accounts.
It doesn't seem like there's
even that kind of relationship
across the aisle anywhere today.
As someone who has watched Washington
through administrations,
Republican and Democrat,
I'm wondering what your reflections are
on what we need to do
to get out of this mess.
- I think it's not as
bad as House of Cards,
but I think it is essential
to have that relationship,
and I learned that from Ed Muskie.
Ed Muskie became the first
Chairman of the Budget Committee.
The question was how to make it work
and he told all of us that worked for him,
"You have to work with
Senator Henry Bellmon,"
who was the ranking member
Republican from Oklahoma.
There were a lot of relationships
that went across the aisle.
We worked with Senator Dole,
a number of different people.
My Helms relationship
solidified that in my head,
and I'll tell you how that happened.
I had just been made ambassador
to the United Nations
and I get this phone call
from Senator Helms himself.
There was a women's college
in Raleigh and he said,
"You have been invited to come and speak
"at the Bicentennial Anniversary
at this women's college,
"and would you do it?"
I thought I could get out of it by saying,
"Sure, I'll do it, but
if you come with me."
So I get this call back a
half an hour later, he said
"I've changed my schedule,
I'm going there with you."
So we go there and when somebody
has invited you to speak
and they introduce you, they usually,
you were really nice, but
they usually say nice things.
They're not gonna say,
"This idiot woman has just shown up here."
He introduces me, I was
talking to students,
they were asking me
questions about the UN,
here's this man who hated the UN,
and I was answering them.
We flew back together and he
actually kept talking about it,
he was very interested
in it, and all of that.
Then what happens is he
calls me up and he said,
"I want you to come to
my alma mater, Wingate."
I go, we go by car from
Raleigh to this place,
and we're looking for barbecue places,
and we're in this car forever.
We finally get there, and
he was basically bionic
in terms of having artificial hips.
He couldn't move and had
to get out of the car.
So I'm helping him out,
and I'm hanging onto him,
and there are pictures,
and they all of a sudden
start saying, "The odd couple."
I managed to talk about the
Chemical Weapons Convention
and the convention about women.
He's sitting in the audience, I mean,
sitting with me on the stage,
and we keep talking about
more and more things.
Then I'm named Secretary of State
and I go to talk to
him about confirmation.
He said, "Miss Madeleine, we
will make history together."
If you look at my hearings with him,
they're all on tape, he's winking at me
and being very, very friendly.
We were talking about NATO expansion.
It wouldn't have happened without him.
I do think, despite the
fact that we disagreed
on very basic aspects
of America, ultimately,
we were able to work together.
I think it makes a difference
and I am very troubled
by what is going on now.
I love the American system.
I worked with Congress
when I was on the
National Security Council.
I am Chairman of the Board
of the National Democratic Institute,
which talks about the nuts
and bolts of democracy.
We're all over the place.
We were somewhere and I say,
"The essence of democracy is the existence
"of an opposition party because, in fact,
"it allows a choice to the voters
"and accountability to the government,
"and it's important to compromise."
Then they say to us, whatever country,
"Yeah, like you guys now?"
So we are a very bad
model for our own system.
I do think it's essential,
and I think we all need to work on it.
I actually have a lot
of Republican friends,
and the kind that I have
kind of feel out of it
in terms of some of the
things that are happening.
There's the center that
needs to be worked on.
Part of the problem that has happened
in terms of some of the
international issues,
the far left and the far right
have met on the other side
in terms of not getting involved
in anything internationally.
I think that is dangerous, obviously,
the way that we've been discussing issues.
So I would like to see more
Democrats in the center
work with Republicans in the center
to try to regain some civility
and actually get something done.
(applause)
I also have to say that
I find passing strange
that people would wanna
be elected to Congress
because they don't like government
and don't wanna be there.
Why do they wanna get elected?
- I'm not sure anyone
here can answer that one.
I just wanna ask one last question
and then we'll turn it
over to the audience,
which I'm sure will have many more
interesting questions than I have.
Diplomacy is about sending signals
and you innovated a new kind of signaling
that had to do with jewelry.
I know that you've written a whole book
about signaling through jewelry.
My guess is that there are
courses at NYU and elsewhere
that would love to have
you come talk about fashion
and diplomacy, but tell us
about the brooch you're wearing
and perhaps about some of the other hints
that you have used to send messages.
- Well, I'll tell you how it got started.
When I got to the UN,
it was in February '93
and the Gulf War had just ended
and the cease fire had been translated
into a series of sanctions resolutions.
I was an instructive ambassador,
which meant that we had
to keep the sanctions on
and my instructions were to
say perfectly terrible things
about Saddam Hussein
constantly, which he deserved.
He invaded Kuwait.
So we went at this a long time.
Finally, there's a poem
that appeared in the papers
in Baghdad comparing me to many things,
but among them, "an unparalleled serpent."
I had a snake pin so I decided to wear it
when we were talking about Iraq.
You've seen when the ambassadors come out
and talk to the press after the meetings.
All of a sudden, the
camera zeroes in and says,
"Why are you wearing that snake pin?"
I said, "Because Saddam Hussein
"compared me to an unparalleled serpent."
I thought, "Well, this is fun."
(laughter)
So I went out and I bought
a lot of costume jewelry
according to what I
thought we were gonna do
on any given day.
On good days, I wore flowers
and butterflies and balloons
and on bad days, insects in a variety.
The other ambassadors would say,
"What are we gonna do today?"
As you remember, first
President Bush had said,
"Read my lips, no new taxes."
I said, "Read my pins,"
and that is how it started.
Then there are lots of
stories that I have with them,
but there are times that the pins ...
This pin, let me tell you about,
was given to me by General Shalikashvili,
my great friend.
He'd be Chairman of the Joint Chiefs.
It's actually called America
and the pearls signify
the aspects of America,
justice, freedom, prosperity, liberty.
I thought it was a good thing to wear.
Pins have gotten me into trouble
and they've gotten me out of trouble.
What happened, you've seen this picture,
when we were doing the
50th anniversary of NATO.
What happened was that President Clinton
and Secretary of Defense, Bill Cohen and I
were sitting on a sofa, three of us.
I don't know who started it,
but we did the hear no evil,
see no, speak no evil monkeys.
It was in Time Magazine, we
looked like crazy people.
I was somewhere and they
had three monkey pins
so I bought 'em.
We went to Russia for our
summit in the summer of 2000
and I wore the monkey pins.
We're walking in and President Putin
turns to President Clinton and says,
"We always notice what pins
Secretary Albright wears.
"Why are you wearing those monkeys?"
I actually said the
following thing, which is,
"Because I think your
Chechnya policy is evil."
President Clinton looks at me like,
"Have you lost your mind?
"You are the chief diplomat,
"you have just screwed up the summit,"
Putin was furious.
Anyway, so that was that.
That's when they got me into trouble.
Then there was a time they
got me out of trouble.
This is a little risque.
What happened was I
actually invented the art
of diplomatic kissing.
You can't visualize Baker
or Kissinger going in,
having a big embrace.
Anyway, it's much more
complicated than meets the eye.
The Latin, some kiss on the right cheek,
some on the left cheek, a lot bump noses.
Then the French kiss twice,
the Dutch kiss three times.
Then there was Yasser Arafat.
- [Daniel] Just kept on kissing, yeah.
- So I arrive in South
Korea one time, big embrace,
we have a great meeting,
and all of a sudden,
I get a phone call when
it's over, I'm back home,
from a journalist who says,
"Don't you think that the
Korean foreign minister
"should be fired about
what he said about you?"
I said, "Well, what did he say?"
He said, "I really like it
"When Secretary Albright comes here.
"We're the same age, but
I'm this tired old man,
"and when I embrace her,
she has very firm breasts."
"So what do you have to say about that?"
I said,
"Well, I have to have something
to put those pins on."
(laughter)
(applause)
- Okay, well you took
the wind out of my sails.
I can only say that having mastered
diplomacy policy politics,
stand up is the obvious next step.
With that, how about
we have some questions
from the audience?
I just want to insure,
please state your name.
That's one rule.
The other rule is please
have a question mark
at the end of the
question, no perorations,
no declamations, that
would be great, thank you.
Can we start over here?
- [Woman] Thank you very much.
What actions would you
actually like to see the US
take in Syria or regards
to Syria and do you think
that those are actually
feasibly going to happen, ever?
- I would like to see
some kind of additional
humanitarian assistance.
The United States has done
quite a lot, I have to say.
The question is how to work out a way
to get more assistance in there,
and I'm not sure this can happen,
in terms of some kind
of military protection,
not necessarily by the United States,
but in a way that food
really could be delivered
and also medicines.
One of the things that
we're seeing, for instance,
we have thought polio has been eradicated.
It has come back in a variety of places.
Syria is one of them, and
it has spread to a number
of other places.
I think that we need to
somehow get in there.
I know there are discussions
about a no-fly zone.
I think that's very difficult
and then I think that some
of the diplomatic activities
in terms of trying to get
a transition government,
it is essential.
I do think that we need to get some
additional assistance in there,
try to figure out a
protected way to get it in,
but not just by the United States.
- [Woman] Thank you.
- [Woman] Hi, so shortly after
you were Secretary of State,
the terrorist attacks happened,
and I was just wondering
how much Afghanistan was on the radar
when you were Secretary of State
and what you tried to do with Al Qaeda
and other terrorist
organizations in that region.
- First of all, (clears throat) excuse me.
Al Qaeda was very much on the scene
and something (clears throat) excuse me.
One of the things that
had happened very early on
in '93, when there was
initial terrorist attack
or an attempt on the World Trade Center,
also threats at the United Nations,
this is something that we
actually worked on together
in terms of trying to
figure out what happened,
who had done it.
We did know that various
elements of Al Qaeda
and Osama Bin Laden were
behind a lot of the aspects,
that he had spent some time in Sudan,
and then there were the embassy attacks,
which is a whole other issue
in terms of how we responded to that.
The other part though, on
Afghanistan that was going on,
was, I think in many ways, Afghanistan,
everything that happened
after the Soviet invasion
and the Soviets were pushed out,
was lack of attention
by the United States.
We just left.
The Taliban, in many ways, was created,
some by the Pakistanis, in
terms of creating law and order.
What we were trying to
do when we were in office
was trying to figure out how to support
and who to support in Afghanistan.
It was very much on our radar.
I went a number of times to refugee camps.
One of the issues was we didn't
wanna recognize the Taliban
because of their treatment of women.
So there was never neverland.
We were trying to get
then, when Osama Bin Laden
went to Afghanistan, to get
the Pakistanis to help us
get him out.
That wasn't happening.
It was very much on our radar screen.
By the way, one of the
things that was going on,
we spent an awful lot of
time dealing with issues
to do with terrorism.
President Clinton, you were
involved in all of this
in terms of creating
counter terrorism centers,
a number of different ways.
There was a whole part that
was tracking Osama Bin Laden.
We were working on it
in all kinds of ways.
One of the interesting
periods in American history
or politics is the transition period.
Both Sandy Berger and
I reaped our successors
about the threat of terrorism.
There was no principals
meeting to discuss terrorism
until after 9/11 and
there was a real question
as to how seriously it
was taken, but believe me,
we spent a lot of time on
Afghanistan and on terrorism.
- [Daniel] Okay, over here.
- [Man] Thank you again for coming.
My question is more about eastern Europe.
I studied abroad in Prague last year
and I talked to a lot of people
about how they were nervous
about our surge in Russia
and I'm sure those feelings
have only grown stronger since then.
With most of these countries
in eastern Europe now,
part of NATO, the Baltic
countries, the Czech Republic
and so on, if Russia were
to move into look to protect
the Russian minorities in
Estonia, in the Baltic states,
would one of those states
evoke section five of NATO
or the prospects of that?
How do you see eastern European countries
reacting to Russia in their backyards?
- Article 5 is central to the NATO treaty.
What it says is an attack
on one is an attack on all.
One of the issues that
we were dealing with
when we were looking over the
new strategic concept at all
was hos relevant Article
5 continued to be.
Everybody signed up for it.
What was an interesting
question at that time
was whether a cyber attack
was an Article 5 attack.
The question was, were you
able to trace it or not?
The question of Article 5 is out there.
Article 5 has only been invoked once
in the entire history,
which was after 9/11.
The question is, if it were to be invoked,
then in fact, there is a responsibility
to do something about
it, and the question is,
to what extent, what one would
do, who would carry it out?
It's the threat of Article 5
that I think is actually very important.
It has worked in a
number of different ways
in terms of deterrence.
The problem is if one takes
what is happening now,
is there's not gonna be
some kind of a military ...
Part of the way this has been happening
is through provocations and things.
It's hard to speak
about what might happen,
but Article 5 is a real thing.
One of the things that
is happening is NATO
has set up a number of
exercises that are going on.
There are airplanes that
are doing surveillance
and NATO, Secretary General Rasmussen
has really been fairly active on all this.
When President Obama was in Brussels,
this was a part of the discussion.
We have an obligation, but the question is
how the various parts of it would evolve.
I think it has been an
important deterrent, frankly.
- [Daniel] Over here, please.
- [Man] One argument I've heard
against the two-state solution is that
it would make it much more difficult
for Israel to defend itself
against future Palestinian aggression.
Given that you're a supporter
of the two-state solution,
how would you respond to that?
- I don't agree with that.
I think part of the issue
here is, first of all,
Israel now, in fact many
ways, has walls all around,
much larger.
I think that there are
attacks going on now,
and I think the question is
how you establish a system
whereby the Palestinians
feel that they have
some buy-in to what is going on,
and that some of the hostility
and anger, I believe,
would disappear and it
would make it harder
to mobilize various groups
among the Palestinians
who are constantly into arguing
that they don't have legitimate rights.
The question would be how
the two states are set up.
One of the things that Secretary
Kerry has been involved in
and that he asked me to help on,
we just had a meeting about this,
in terms of trying to
figure out how to have a way
that in a new state of Palestine,
there would be some economic viability.
Part of the problem is that
there's a whole generation
of young people that don't have jobs.
There needs to be in a Palestinian state,
economic investment and
some validity and buy-in
to having a different future.
I have to tell you, when I was Secretary
and I went on my first trip
as Secretary to Ramallah,
I went to a school and a
young man there asked me,
"What is my future," and I
couldn't answer the question.
Therefore, I think that
part of what needs to happen
is to get this youth cohort having jobs
that has to come from a two-state solution
and economic viability
of the Palestinian state.
- [Daniel] Okay.
- [Avena] Madame Secretary,
it is such an honor to
hear from you today.
My name is Avena Sedarius.
I'm a Foreign Service Officer
and I joined the Foreign
Service when you were Secretary.
So working on my very first VIP visit
was your visit to Thailand
for the ASEAN Summit
and watching you sing with
Alex Downer, Mambo Number 5
was my first foreign experience
as a Foreign Service Officer.
In light of what we remember then,
your very groundbreaking
work in North Korea,
can you give us your thoughts
on the negotiations with Iran
on the nuclear file, and if it goes well,
what should be the next issue we broach
with the Iranians?
Should it be containing the IRGC?
Should it be their mucking,
how would you approach this?
- First of all, let me say various things
that you never thought
you would have to do
as Secretary of State would be to sing.
- [Avena] And you were good.
- I was told when I first
started that it's required
at this last dinner at the ASEAN,
every country puts on a
skit, and somebody said,
"America does really badly, always."
On the more serious question,
I think that the talks are
going on right now in Vienna
under Secretary Sherman,
who is there representing,
although it says "senior
official," basically saying
that they're hopeful in
terms of some of the things
that have been laid down at the moment.
I think that there are viable options
that are in the agreement.
The real question is
the amount of enrichment
the Iranians can undertake
and will they stop
in terms of dismantling
their plans and things?
I think it is worth pushing forward on it,
but it all has to be verifiable.
That is the problem.
The issue is, you were
talking about one thing
links to another, we
have a diplomatic issue
at this very moment.
The person that was named
to represent Iran at the UN
was one of the hostage takers in 1979
and we have just turned
down the visa application.
The question is how that kind of thing
then impacts the negotiator in Vienna.
Also, one of the things
that we somehow forget
are the domestic politics of Iran.
Rouhani is theoretically
immoderate how he operates
within a difficult domestic environment
and responds to this
and then does not look
as though he's given
away the entire Iranian
negotiating position.
I think the United States and the P5+1
are in a pretty good
position if we keep pushing
and try to make sure that it's verifiable.
It does have an effect,
also, on North Korea
and North Korea, vice versa.
I personally believe that
it is worth going forward
with the Iranian talks, and pushing,
and trying to figure out
how much space Rouhani
really has and verifiable.
The verifiable part is
the most important aspect,
not to be fooled.
- [Jesse] Good evening, Madame Secretary.
My name's Jesse Perez and I'm
in the masters in Liberal Arts
studies program here at Dartmouth.
My question for you, generally speaking,
is what are your thoughts and insights
in terms of American states craft,
certainly because we are
a war-fatigued country,
more militarized in the
character and nature
of our states craft, do you
think that over the past
10 or 12 years, or 10 or 20 years at that,
American foreign policy,
or the Department of Peace
in this particular case, has lost pallor,
relatively speaking, to
much of the conversations
that revolve around military issues?
If so, how do you think it's
going to evolve over time?
- I think that, as I said,
there's a variety of tools
that are out there.
Having used force when Clinton
administration was in office,
ultimately after a great deal of diplomacy
in terms of Bosnia and Kosovo
and not having it work,
then using the threat of
force, and then using diplomacy
to use force, and then using diplomacy
when force was over, I think
you need that kind of mixture
but you don't try to use
force as your main tool.
What I was really troubled by,
I do believe that the American model,
in terms of talking about our values
and how we operate, is something
that is very important.
The United States is better
off when other countries
are stable and I happen
to believe Democratic
and have market systems.
That's why I basically
am an internationalist,
but I'm worried about the
militarization of policy
and especially worried, as I mentioned,
because I am Chairman of the Board
of the National Democratic Institute,
that with what happened in Iraq,
it militarized democracy.
I think it undermined the whole concept
of how we are able to
put our values out there.
I happen to believe that the United States
is an exceptional nation,
but I don't believe that
exceptions should be made for us.
When we do things that
undermine that particular
value system, I think it hurts us.
The militarization of our
policy, I think, has hurt.
It is one of the things
that President Obama,
by making clear that he wanted to end Iraq
and Afghanistan, is trying to make clear,
that we don't have to pursue our policies
through military means.
I agree with you.
I think the problem is,
to go back to my toolbox,
there are not a lot of tools in there.
This is why presidents say,
"All options are on the table,"
but the bottom line is not the
first tool that you pick up,
but there is this combination
of force and diplomacy.
I've mentioned about the pin.
General Shalikashvili gave it to me,
and one of the times he
and I were standing outside
the Situation Room and
Secretary Ruben came by.
He said, "Aha, force and diplomacy."
Shali said, "Yeah, and which is which?"
The bottom line is that the Pentagon
and the State Department
have to figure out
how to work together.
You can't just eschew the use of force,
but I prefer moving on
the diplomatic track
with force in the background.
(applause)
- Can I follow that up quickly?
You spent a lot of time in the 90s
trying to restore funding
at the State Department.
There were a lot of very painful cuts.
You talked about the toolbox.
When I look at the toolbox,
I always see a really big hammer
and maybe a really small pliers
because we so underfund diplomacy.
We're in a better place
than we used to be,
but if you were president,
would you like to see a State Department
that had $10, $20, $30 billion more?
Ultimately, money is
the key diplomatic tool
and I don't think people
always appreciate that.
- I think people don't understand
the relative size of one
budget verses the other.
Even though the Defense
Department is under sequestration
in the Budget Control Act,
it has somewhere around
$500 billion and the State Department,
in order to pay for the
services of the diplomats,
and the buildings, and the programs,
has about $50 billion.
A lot of people on the issue
of foreign aid, for instance,
I'm not sure not in this
audience, but other audiences,
if you ask,
"How much do you think
goes to foreign aid,"
people will say, "25% of the budget."
You say,
"No, but how much would you
really think it should be?"
People say 10% and you
say, "It's less than 1%."
In many ways, a tool that
one needs when I talk about
it's the economic assistance
in some form or another,
it is a very important tool
and there's not a lot of money
that goes to it.
People think that
diplomats have fancy lives
and go to a lot of parties,
but the bottom line is
the security of our
buildings are important
and then having foreign service officers
and civil servants that
are able to do the work.
It's disproportionate and I
think one could do a great deal.
It's very hard to explain.
I have to say that going up to the hill
and asking for foreign assistance,
these are two words that
should never go together,
it's like selling some disease.
The bottom line is you have to say
that this is good for
our national security.
It definitely helps us to be able to have
that kind of money.
- [Woman] Do you think
the world has gotten
more or less peaceful during your life?
- More or less peaceful?
I wish, listening to your
voice, that I could say it has.
In a strange way, there is no such thing,
I don't believe in Cold
War nostalgia when,
in fact, the US and the Soviet
Union were facing each other
with nuclear weapons
and when people like me
were your age, we actually
practiced going under our desks
and being afraid of a nuclear attack.
The bottom line is that
the world was dangerous
but there were rules.
They operated in a way that
people knew what was going on.
Now what I think has happened
is there are an awful lot
of factors out there
that are hard to control
and figure out.
A lot about the system doesn't work
and an awful lot of people
are dying in a lot of places,
some because their
neighbors don't like them
or they are fighting over
borders or something.
If one looks at the world,
it's not that peaceful.
America is a very special place.
We, I think, are blessed
by having neighbors
on both sides that are friendly
and mostly oceans that protect us.
The question is whether
people in the United States
care whether other parts of the world
are peaceful or not and
whether problems out there
come home to America.
You are gonna grow up in a
pretty tough neighborhood,
not neighborhood as
much as the environment,
and the rules aren't there yet.
One hopes that there will be rules
that will make it more peaceful.
(applause)
- [Man] First of all, thank you very much
for sharing your wisdom with us.
My question has something to do with
the US China relationship.
I've heard that in recent years,
many Chinese people think that China
should thank George W. Bush
and Vladimir Putin equally
because the former
started the war on terror
and the latter took over Crimea,
both of which essentially
helped China to buy
almost two more decades
of time to further rise
economically and militarily
when America was busy
dealing with other issues.
I'm just wondering, my question is,
how do you see the impact
of this kind of thinking
on President Obama's
pivot back to Asia policy
and the future of US China relationship?
- I think that the US China relationship
is the most important
relationship of the 21st century.
It is a huge country
with a huge population
and a system that is trying to reform.
They are, you can decide,
either our competitors
or our partners.
They're a little bit of both,
but I think it is the major relationship.
One of the things is the United States
is an Atlantic and a Pacific power.
I think it was very appropriate
when President Obama
was talking about rebalancing.
He is now going to go visit Asia.
He had a meeting with President Xi Jinping
in terms of trying to develop
some kind of a new model
of our relationship.
I do think that the way you
stated it is interesting
in that we have been
absorbed with other things.
There are real questions as to what lesson
the Chinese will draw from Crimea.
I've been reading some
articles where they think,
"Aha, Taiwan."
The bottom line is, what are the lessons?
Part of the problem with
dealing with terrorism
is that some countries
designate people as terrorists
who really aren't.
They are people who just object,
like the Uyghurs or something.
I think that the Chinese
are reading what is going on
in a variety of places carefully,
but basically, the US Chinese relationship
is absolutely crucial.
We are linked economically
in a number of ways,
and also, we would like to see them
take a more responsible role globally
in order to manage some of the issues
that young woman asked about,
is how to realize that by cooperating,
we can deal on some of the issues
in other parts of the world.
It is, just flat out I would say,
the most important relationship.
- [Daniel] Good question. Okay.
- [Justin] Hi, my name is Justin Moffatt,
and my question's in regard
to the diplomatic toolbox
that you were talking about.
What is the role, would you say,
of using red lines as President Obama did
most recently with the Syrian conflict
and how that might change
how the United States
might be able to respond?
Also, what is the role of Congress
in regards to being
able to effectively act
in a time sensitive situation,
as we were this past summer?
- Let me say, here I've been
talking for quite a long time
and I haven't blamed the
media for anything yet.
I think that one of the
problems that does happen
with the 24/7 news cycle,
and we've both been in the government
in terms of having some response.
If you don't answer right away,
then whatever administration
is accused of being indecisive.
If you provide an answer,
like the red line,
why you are decisive, then the problem is,
how do you live up to it?
I know in our own experience,
I know this from we promised in Bosnia,
in response to Congress,
that we would be out in
a year and we weren't.
I learned something, which I
that I think it's a mistake
to have deadlines or red lines
because it becomes a gun to your own head.
It's very hard to stay
away from saying something
dramatic when you are always
accused of not saying whatever,
you didn't answer strongly enough.
That is a real issue.
If CNN can make breaking
news for three weeks
out of an airplane, they are
just looking for something.
That is an issue.
The role about Congress that you said,
I think is very, very important.
According to the Constitution,
Congress is an equal
power of the government
and the way it is set up,
depending upon what course one takes,
is called imitation to struggle.
They have a role and part
of the thing that happens
is the timing of the Congressional role
and how the other foreign
audiences actually hear
what is being said.
On the issue, for instance, on
Iran that was asked earlier,
in their discussions about
reimposing sanctions,
that has some, I would
say, negative effect
in terms of some of the discussions
or when Congress puts
automatic sanctions on.
We have a very rough
relationship with Pakistan,
partially because there
are automatic sanctions
that came on over a nuclear issue
or the Musharraf Coup.
So instead of being cooperative,
I think that there is this
struggle that goes on,
but Congress, that's why we
need to have better information
between Congress and the Executive Branch.
It is a co-equal branch of government
and the Constitution says so,
and the question is whether
the members of Congress
actually do their homework.
It's very interesting that
some members of Congress
are really proud that
they don't have passports,
not really helpful in terms
of trying to deal with
international issues.
- Okay.
I'm afraid we're going
to have to end it there,
but I did want to apologize to
those who were still on line.
I'm sorry that we can't
get all the questions in.
I did want to thank you
again, Madame Secretary,
for coming here today.
I particularly want to thank you
and everyone should know
that you've been a real trooper today.
You have met already with
faculty, with students,
with post-docs, and with
faculty student post-docs
in the public now, and you
have been absolutely fabulous.
The John Sloan Dickey Center
is named for one of Dartmouth's
great presidents, John Sloan Dickey,
who incidentally was a
State Department man.
At a critical time, at
the end of World War II
and the beginning of the post war period,
and he argued forcefully for engagement
and left a strong imprint on
many, many Dartmouth grads,
particularly with his famous remark
that the world's troubles
are your troubles
and that there's nothing
wrong with the world
that better human beings cannot fix.
I can't think of anyone who embodies
that kind of moral
imperative more than you do.
So it's been wonderful.
- I want to thank you for,
we were partners in a lot of work,
your service to the
United States government
and how lucky Dartmouth
is to have you here.
- Thank you very much.
(applause)
- Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thanks a lot.